Add release process reference guide (#230)
nebari-dev/nebari-docs: docs/docs/community/release-process.md

---

> id: release-process-branching-strategy

Reviewer: since I cannot leave comments on files names - this needs to be under `docs/community/maintainers`

title: Release process and branching strategy
description: Release process and branching strategy
---

# The Nebari release process

This page describes the high-level details of cutting a new Nebari release.

|        Cadence        |               Versioning System                |                                                                                    Release Checklist                                                                                     |                                                                                        Testing Checklist                                                                                         |
| :-------------------: | :--------------------------------------------: | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |

> | 3rd week of the month | [CalVer](#calver-details) - (i.e. `2022.10.1`) | [Link to issue template](https://github.com/nebari-dev/nebari/issues/new?assignees=&labels=type%3A+release+%F0%9F%8F%B7&template=release-checklist.md&title=%5BRELEASE%5D+%3Cversion%3E) | [Link to issue template](https://github.com/nebari-dev/nebari/issues/new?assignees=&labels=type%3A+release+%F0%9F%8F%B7&template=testing-checklist.md&title=Testing+checklist+for+%3Cversion%3E) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 3rd week of the month | [CalVer](#calver-details) - (for example `2022.10.1`) | [Link to issue template](https://github.com/nebari-dev/nebari/issues/new?assignees=&labels=type%3A+release+%F0%9F%8F%B7&template=release-checklist.md&title=%5BRELEASE%5D+%3Cversion%3E) | [Link to issue template](https://github.com/nebari-dev/nebari/issues/new?assignees=&labels=type%3A+release+%F0%9F%8F%B7&template=testing-checklist.md&title=Testing+checklist+for+%3Cversion%3E) |
```

avoid abbreviations

## Release Captain responsibilities

For every release, there is an assigned "Release Captain". The Release Captain's responsibilities are:

- Manage both the release and testing processes and update the checklists as needed.
- Communicate the status of the release to the rest of the Nebari development team and the community (through updating the checklists and adding status updates as comments).
- Assign owners to checklist items (if not owned by the Release Captain).
- Adjust the schedule, particularly the publishing dates, based on defects found, fixes made, holidays, vacations, and so on.

> - Ensure a new branch and milestone is created after completing a release cycle.

Reviewer: I believe this statement is no longer applicable since we are using `develop` now - so there is no need to create a new branch only the milestone

Author: This is intermediate release branch is part of the gitlab gitflow and is what I proposed in the [original notion doc](https://www.notion.so/quansightlabs/GitFlow-Workflow-8596ceff436740e8adad9fddb328848b). 

There are two situations where this release branch comes in handy. In both instances, the `develop` branch has commits that shouldn't be included in the next release. First and most clear example is for hotfixes. Second is when there are commits made to `develop` that are not to be included in this upcoming release but rather the next release. 

`develop` branch commit history
```
commit 3 - for the dec release 
commit 2 - for the jan release 
commit 1 - for the dec release
```

Without an intermediate branch (say `release/2022.12.1`), all three of these commits are going to make into the December release which may not be what we want. With this intermediate branch, we can cherry-pick `commit 1` and `commit 3` from `develop` and cut the release with only the commits we need. 

There is an alternative and that would be to hold off merging PRs until the current release has been cut. This alternative unfortunately relies on everyone knowing which PRs belong to which release (and these things may change).

Author: Ignore this, I misunderstood the line this was referring to. We're in agreement :sweat_smile:

## CalVer details

Nebari releases should follow the following CalVer versioning style:

```
YYYY-MM-releaseNumber
```

:::info

> `YYYY` represents the year - i.e. `2023`
> 
> `MM` represents the _non-zero padded_ month - i.e. `1` for January, `12` for December
> 
> `releaseNumber` represents the current release for that month, starting at `1`. Anything above `1` represents a [hotfix (patch) release](#hotfixes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`YYYY` represents the year - such as `2023`

`MM` represents the _non-zero padded_ month - such as `1` for January, `12` for December

`releaseNumber` represents the current release for that month, starting at `1`. Anything above `1` represents a [hotfix (patch) release](#hotfixes).
```

as per our [style guide](https://www.nebari.dev/docs/community/style-guide/)

:::

:::caution
For the release tag, there should be NO prepended `v`
:::

For example, the first Nebari CalVer release was `2022.10.1`. If a hotfix release was needed in the same month, we increment the `releaseNumber` by 1, which would be `2022.10.2` (_this is to illustrate how the increment works, this release does not exist._)

> ## Gitflow and branching strategy

Reviewer: This isn't very clear - as Gitflow is a branching/contribution strategy and we are not using Gitflow (well not strict gitflow anyway)
```suggestion
## Branching strategy
```

> Gitflow is framework for managing `git` branches by assigning certain roles to particular branches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use the following guidelines to manage `git` branches by assigning certain roles to particular branches.
```

- `develop` - Represents the active development branch and is the _default_ branch on the GitHub repository.

> - `main` - Represents a production-ready state of the code-base, with an appropriate tag to match the most recent release.

Reviewer: Suggestion: add a link to the GitHub references for this

> - `release/YYYY-MM-releaseNumber` - Represents the branch for the upcoming release.

Reviewer: Perhaps it's worth adding a note that this branch is _only_ existent during a release cycle i.e. while actively working on making a nebari release

### Process

Although this process is captured in the [release checklist template](https://github.com/nebari-dev/nebari/issues/new?assignees=&labels=type%3A+release+%F0%9F%8F%B7&template=release-checklist.md&title=%5BRELEASE%5D+%3Cversion%3E), it's worth making clear how branches are managed.

- Active development occurs against the `develop` branch.

> - When it's time for a release, the Release Captain will create the release branch `release/YYYY-MM-releaseNumber` and preparing the branch for the release. At times, this might mean cherry-picking a commits that are needed for this release and at other times, this might mean merging `develop` into this release branch.

Reviewer: Add a note: the release captain must ensure there are no stale release branches, and if there are, they should delete them before creating a new release branch

> - When it's time for a release, the Release Captain will create the release branch `release/YYYY-MM-releaseNumber` and preparing the branch for the release. At times, this might mean cherry-picking a commits that are needed for this release and at other times, this might mean merging `develop` into this release branch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When it's time for a release, the Release Captain will create the release branch `release/YYYY-MM-releaseNumber` and prepare the branch for the release. At times, this might mean cherry-picking commits that are needed for this release and at other times, this might mean merging `develop` into this release branch.
```

---
id: release-process

> title: The Nebari release process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Release process
```

> description: The Nebari release process and workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Release process
```

---

# The Nebari release process

This page describes the high-level details of cutting a new Nebari release.

> |                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer: Need to remove this row - otherwise it renders as an empty row

Author: I rotated the table instead 👍

| :---------------: | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |

> |      Cadence      |                                                                                             Monthly                                                                                              |

Reviewer: Monthly - on the fourth week of the month

Author: I updated this with the `3rd week of the month`. This gives us a little buffer ;)

> | Versioning System |                                                                                    [CalVer](#calver-details)                                                                                     |

Reviewer: I know this links to the section below but I'd still spell out the CalVer flavour we use - add an example

| Release Checklist |     [Link to issue template](https://github.com/nebari-dev/nebari/issues/new?assignees=&labels=type%3A+release+%F0%9F%8F%B7&template=release-checklist.md&title=%5BRELEASE%5D+%3Cversion%3E)     |
| Testing Checklist | [Link to issue template](https://github.com/nebari-dev/nebari/issues/new?assignees=&labels=type%3A+release+%F0%9F%8F%B7&template=testing-checklist.md&title=Testing+checklist+for+%3Cversion%3E) |

## Release Captain responsibilities

> For every release, there is an assigned "Release Captain". It is the responsibility of this person to manage both the release and testing checklists as well as to communicate the status of the release to the rest of the Nebari development team and the community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For every release, there is an assigned "Release Captain". The Release Captain's responsibilities are:

- Manage both the release and testing processes and update the checklists as needed.
- Communicate the status of the release to the rest of the Nebari development team and the community (through updating the checklists and adding status updates as comments).
- Assign owners to checklist items (if not owned by the Release Captain).
- Adjust the schedule, particularly the publishing dates, based on defects found, fixes made, holidays, vacations, and so on.
- Ensure a new branch and milestone is created after completing a release cycle.
```

Communication channels that need to be updated are:

- the release checklist issue itself

> - the `#nebari-dev` slack channel

Reviewer: Since this is not a public channel and it's likely that folks will get confused I prefer removing this

> Communication channels that need to be updated are:
> 
> - the release checklist issue itself
> - the `#nebari-dev` slack channel

Reviewer: Thinking about this - the suggestion above should cover this
```suggestion
```

## CalVer details

> These releases should follow the following CalVer versioning style:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nebari releases should follow the following CalVer versioning style:
```

```
YYYY-MM-releaseNumber
```

:::info
`YYYY` represents the year - i.e. `2023`

`MM` represents the _non-zero padded_ month - i.e. `1` for January, `12` for December

`releaseNumber` represents the current release for that month, starting at `1`. Anything above `1` represents a [hotfix (patch) release](#hotfixes).
:::

:::caution
For the release tag, there should be NO prepended `v`
:::

> For example, the first Nebari CalVer release was `2022.10.1`. If a hotfix release was needed in the same month, we simply increment the `releaseNumber` by 1, which would be `2022.10.2` (_this is to illustrate how the increment works, this release does not exist._)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the first Nebari CalVer release was `2022.10.1`. If a hotfix release was needed in the same month, we increment the `releaseNumber` by 1, which would be `2022.10.2` (_this is to illustrate how the increment works, this release does not exist._)
```

> ## Gitflow and branching strategy

Reviewer: I know this is somewhat related to releases, but I would prefer having the gitflow + branching in a separate doc. 

As a newcomer, I would not look at the release process if I only care about how to open a PR and which branch to use.

Author: As you mentioned, these concepts are closely linked and I believe they should remain together. We reference the "release process" quite a bit in the "Gitflow" section and if the our branching strategy makes sense, newcomers shouldn't need to decide which branch they need to open their PR against 😊

Reviewer 2: I'd also like to make the branching strategy more visible/finable in the sidebar, for folks who might be looking exactly for this information. Bokeh contributors tend to look for these details when they notice the branch names because it is not a super common workflow.

If we decide to not create a separate doc, I think it'll be worth including it in the page title: "Release process and branching strategy". :)

Reviewer: Much better

Gitflow is framework for managing `git` branches by assigning certain roles to particular branches.

> `main` - Represents a production-ready state of the code-base, with an appropriate tag to match the most recent release.
> 
> `release/YYYY-MM-releas1eNumber` - Represents the branch for the upcoming release and is the _default_ branch on the GitHub repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `main` - Represents a production-ready state of the code-base, with an appropriate tag to match the most recent release.

- `release/YYYY-MM-releas1eNumber` - Represents the branch for the upcoming release and is the _default_ branch on the GitHub repository.
```

### Process

Although this process is captured in the [release checklist template](https://github.com/nebari-dev/nebari/issues/new?assignees=&labels=type%3A+release+%F0%9F%8F%B7&template=release-checklist.md&title=%5BRELEASE%5D+%3Cversion%3E), it's worth making clear how branches are managed.

> Whenever a new release is out, it is the responsibility of the Release Captain to create a new release branch `release/YYYY-MM-releaseNumber` for the next month's release and to set this new branch as the default branch on the GitHub repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever a new release is out, it is the responsibility of the Release Captain to create a new release branch, `release/YYYY-MM-releaseNumber` for the next month's release and to set this new branch as the default branch on the GitHub repository.
Setting this as the default branch ensures that new Pull Requests will automatically default to submitting against it. Force pushes are not allowed to these branches.
```

> All feature branches and bug fixes pull requests (PRs) will then be opened against this new release branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Active development occurs against the `release/YYYY-MM-releaseNumber` branch.
```

> And the cycle continues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

:::note
This process was inspired by the Bokeh [BEP6](https://github.com/bokeh/bokeh/wiki/BEP-6:-Branching-Strategy).

> :::

Reviewer: Suggest adding this as an acknowledgement section as we do for nebari.dev/docs/community/
